README.md, before:

# 🌍 QuakeWatch — Real-time Earthquake Data Pipeline & Dashboard

QuakeWatch is a data engineering project that ingests, processes, and visualizes earthquake data in near real time.  
It fetches seismic event data, stores it in a PostgreSQL database, exposes it via a FastAPI service, and provides an interactive Streamlit dashboard for exploration.

---

## 📌 Overview

The system is made up of three main parts:

1. **ETL Pipeline**
   - **Extract**: Pulls earthquake event data from the USGS Earthquake API.
   - **Transform**: Cleans and structures the data (e.g., extracting country names from raw place descriptions, converting data types).
   - **Load**: Stores processed events into a PostgreSQL database for analysis.

2. **API (FastAPI)**
   - Serves clean, structured earthquake data from the database.
   - Provides endpoints for:
     - Recent earthquake events
     - Statistics by country
     - Health checks for service monitoring
   - Fully documented with **Swagger UI** at `/docs`.

3. **Dashboard (Streamlit)**
   - Interactive web app to explore quake trends.
   - Shows:
     - Top countries by quake count
     - Recent events table
     - Magnitude timeline chart
     - Map of quake locations
   - Adjustable filters for magnitude threshold and row limits.

---

## 🛠 Tech Stack

| Component        | Technology |
|------------------|------------|
| Data Source      | [USGS Earthquake API](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/fdsnws/event/1/) |
| Database         | PostgreSQL 16 (Docker) |
| API              | FastAPI |
| Dashboard        | Streamlit |
| Containerization | Docker + Docker Compose |
| Language         | Python 3.11 |
| ORM              | SQLAlchemy |
| Data Processing  | Pandas |

---

## 📂 Project Structure

quakewatch/
├─ app/
│ ├─ api.py # FastAPI endpoints
│ ├─ dashboard.py # Streamlit dashboard
│ ├─ db.py # DB connection
│ └─ models.py # ORM models
├─ etl/
│ ├─ extract.py # Data extraction logic
│ ├─ transform.py # Data cleaning
│ ├─ load.py # Load into DB
│ └─ flow.py # ETL orchestration
├─ tests/
│ ├─ test_transform.py # Unit tests for transforms
│ └─ test_api.py # Unit tests for API
├─ docker-compose.yml # Multi-service setup
├─ Dockerfile # API/Dashboard container
├─ requirements.txt # Python dependencies
├─ README.md # Project documentation
└─ .env.example # Sample environment config

---

## 🚀 How to Run Locally

### 1️⃣ Clone the repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/<yourusername>/data-engineering.git
cd data-engineering/quakewatch
2️⃣ Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env
3️⃣ Build and start the services
docker compose up -d --build
This will start:
PostgreSQL on port 5432
FastAPI on port 8000
Streamlit dashboard on port 8501
4️⃣ Access the services
API Docs (Swagger UI) → http://localhost:8000/docs
Dashboard → http://localhost:8501
📊 Example API Calls
Recent events
curl -s "http://localhost:8000/events?min_mag=4&limit=3" | jq .
Stats by country
curl -s "http://localhost:8000/stats/by-country?min_mag=5" | jq .
✅ Features
Automated ETL pipeline to keep data fresh
Database-backed API for clean, structured data
Live dashboard for visual insights
Configurable filters for magnitude and event count
Fully containerized for easy deployment
📅 Future Improvements
Historical trend analysis
Advanced filtering (date range, depth range)
Alerting system for large events
Deployment to cloud (AWS/GCP/Azure)
👩‍💻 Author
Developed by Amber Bellou

Commit message:

Update README with project overview and details

README.md, after:

# 🌍 QuakeWatch — Real-time Earthquake Data Pipeline & Dashboard

QuakeWatch is a data engineering project that ingests, processes, and visualizes earthquake data in near real time.  
It fetches seismic event data, stores it in a PostgreSQL database, exposes it via a FastAPI service, and provides an interactive Streamlit dashboard for exploration.

---
📖 Project Overview
QuakeWatch is a real-time earthquake monitoring system that collects, processes, and visualizes global seismic activity. The goal is to provide a clean, structured dataset and a live dashboard for researchers, analysts, and the public to track earthquakes as they happen.
The system automatically fetches earthquake event data from reliable sources, processes it through a custom ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) pipeline, stores it in a database, and serves it through a modern API. A separate dashboard application presents this data with interactive charts, tables, and maps to make trends and recent activity easy to explore.
🔧 How I Built It
This project was designed from scratch with modularity and scalability in mind:
Data Extraction – A Python ETL script retrieves raw earthquake event data from external APIs.
Transformation – The raw feed is cleaned, enriched (e.g., adding country info), and structured for analytics.
Loading – The processed data is stored in a PostgreSQL database for persistence and querying.
API Layer – A FastAPI service exposes REST endpoints so other applications can access clean earthquake data.
Dashboard – A Streamlit app visualizes real-time stats, including recent events, magnitude distributions, and country-by-country breakdowns.
Containerization – Docker Compose orchestrates the ETL, API, and dashboard for easy local or cloud deployment.
🎯 Purpose and Use Cases
QuakeWatch is useful for:
Researchers studying seismic trends over time.
Governments and disaster-response teams monitoring earthquake activity.
Educators and students learning about seismology and data pipelines.
Anyone curious about real-time global earthquake activity.

## 📌 Overview

The system is made up of three main parts:

1. **ETL Pipeline**
   - **Extract**: Pulls earthquake event data from the USGS Earthquake API.
   - **Transform**: Cleans and structures the data (e.g., extracting country names from raw place descriptions, converting data types).
   - **Load**: Stores processed events into a PostgreSQL database for analysis.

2. **API (FastAPI)**
   - Serves clean, structured earthquake data from the database.
   - Provides endpoints for:
     - Recent earthquake events
     - Statistics by country
     - Health checks for service monitoring
   - Fully documented with **Swagger UI** at `/docs`.

3. **Dashboard (Streamlit)**
   - Interactive web app to explore quake trends.
   - Shows:
     - Top countries by quake count
     - Recent events table
     - Magnitude timeline chart
     - Map of quake locations
   - Adjustable filters for magnitude threshold and row limits.

---

## 🛠 Tech Stack

| Component        | Technology |
|------------------|------------|
| Data Source      | [USGS Earthquake API](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/fdsnws/event/1/) |
| Database         | PostgreSQL 16 (Docker) |
| API              | FastAPI |
| Dashboard        | Streamlit |
| Containerization | Docker + Docker Compose |
| Language         | Python 3.11 |
| ORM              | SQLAlchemy |
| Data Processing  | Pandas |

---

## 📂 Project Structure

quakewatch/
├─ app/
│ ├─ api.py # FastAPI endpoints
│ ├─ dashboard.py # Streamlit dashboard
│ ├─ db.py # DB connection
│ └─ models.py # ORM models
├─ etl/
│ ├─ extract.py # Data extraction logic
│ ├─ transform.py # Data cleaning
│ ├─ load.py # Load into DB
│ └─ flow.py # ETL orchestration
├─ tests/
│ ├─ test_transform.py # Unit tests for transforms
│ └─ test_api.py # Unit tests for API
├─ docker-compose.yml # Multi-service setup
├─ Dockerfile # API/Dashboard container
├─ requirements.txt # Python dependencies
├─ README.md # Project documentation
└─ .env.example # Sample environment config

---

## 🚀 How to Run Locally

### 1️⃣ Clone the repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/<yourusername>/data-engineering.git
cd data-engineering/quakewatch
2️⃣ Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env
3️⃣ Build and start the services
docker compose up -d --build
This will start:
PostgreSQL on port 5432
FastAPI on port 8000
Streamlit dashboard on port 8501
4️⃣ Access the services
API Docs (Swagger UI) → http://localhost:8000/docs
Dashboard → http://localhost:8501
📊 Example API Calls
Recent events
curl -s "http://localhost:8000/events?min_mag=4&limit=3" | jq .
Stats by country
curl -s "http://localhost:8000/stats/by-country?min_mag=5" | jq .
✅ Features
Automated ETL pipeline to keep data fresh
Database-backed API for clean, structured data
Live dashboard for visual insights
Configurable filters for magnitude and event count
Fully containerized for easy deployment
📅 Future Improvements
Historical trend analysis
Advanced filtering (date range, depth range)
Alerting system for large events
Deployment to cloud (AWS/GCP/Azure)
👩‍💻 Author
Developed by Amber Bellou
